day /0/2

---
### Module summary
Driven by trends in the consumer Internet, cloud computing has become the de facto standard to consume and deliver IT services. The cloud computing model builds on the maturation of the Web, combining rapid scalability, proliferation of the Internet and Internet connected devices, unprecedented self-service and the emergence of elegant web-based applications. Data is becoming larger, more complex data sets, especially from new data sources such as the Internet of Things. These data sets are so voluminous that traditional data processing software just can’t manage them. But these massive volumes of data can be used to address new business problems. The module aims to develop a practical understanding of methods, techniques and architectures needed to build cloud computing systems. It will also identify big data systems requirements, so that knowledge may be extracted from large heterogeneous data sets. This module is supported by the strong research interest and expertise in cloud and related technologies within the School of Computer Science and develops expertise in cloud computing and big data systems by giving the students the skills and knowledge to design, build and extend the Internet infrastructure and to design a variety of applications
### Objectives
On completion of this module, students should be able to:
- Demonstrate an understanding of cloud computing techniques and technologies;
- Demonstrate an understanding of the contexts in which big data systems are applied;
- Identify the paradigms that determine the requirements, capabilities and performance of Cloud systems;
- Design a high-level framework of a Cloud architecture;
- Use a range of middleware tools to implement a cloud application;
- Reason about the significance of the new directions that Cloud computing is taking.
### Learning outcomes
On completion of the year/programme students should have provided evidence of being able to:
- to demonstrate in-depth, specialist knowledge and mastery of techniques relevant to the discipline and/or to demonstrate a sophisticated understanding of concepts, information and techniques at the forefront of the discipline;
- to exhibit mastery in the exercise of generic and subject-specific intellectual abilities;
- to demonstrate a comprehensive understanding of techniques applicable to their own research or advanced scholarship;
- proactively to formulate ideas and hypotheses and to develop, implement and execute plans by which to evaluate these;
- critically and creatively to evaluate current issues, research and advanced scholarship in the discipline.
### Syllabus
Definitions of cloud systems; Grids versus Clouds; Cloud application challenges; Taxonomy of cloud systems; Cloud services; Virtualisation; Virtual Infrastructure Management; Virtual machines, containers and unikernels; Scheduling and Orchestration; Disaggregated computing; Serverless architectures; Definitions of big data, the five 'Vs' (Volume, Velocity, Variety, Veracity & Value). MapReduce; Energy efficiency; Service level agreements; Cloud use cases; Programming models; Data-intensive information processing; Quality of Service; Cloud computing future trends; Security and trust; ubiquitous clouds and the Internet of things, cloud economy, edge computing. Exascale computing