# Intro
## Security Goals & Properties
- Data confidentiality
- Data integrity: No modification, insertion, deletion or replay
- High availability: Amazon systems aer available 99.9% of the year
- Authenticity: Data sources and system users
- Access control
- Trustworthy system logs

## Attackers follow the M.O.M. acronym 
**Method**: They have the skills and tools to attack the systems and potentially have information about it.
**Opportunity**: They have a time/chance and the acces to carry out this attack e.g., systems can be accessed remotely.
**Motive**: They have a reason to attack e.g., Financial or Political.
### Assets and Adversaries 
To identify assets, you must analyse the system and the user themselves e.g., A photo of a celebrity is considered an asset, whereas a photo of a non-famous person might not be. Likewise, user data is considered an asset as it's exposure can lead to financial gain.

An adversary is the perpetrator with their eyes on the asset.
### Vulnerabilities
For attacks to be possible there must be vulnerabilities. These occur when system specifications or conditions are loosely defined e.g., buffer overflows (unspecified buffer size) and SQL Injection attacks.
### Threats
A threat is a set of circumstances that has the *potential* to cause *harm or loss*.
### Problem
A problem exists when there is both a threat and a vulnerability.
If the vulnerability can be controlled the then threat can be contained e.g., a *vulnerability* of unprotected data can be *mitigated* via the enabling of access control.
## Threats and Controls
Four main types of threats:
1. Interception: Gaining access to an asset.
2. Interruption: Preventing access to an asset.
3. Modification: Tampering of an asset.
4. Fabrication: Addition of nonexistent items.

Four main types of controls:
1. Prevention: Remove all vulnerabilities.
2. Deferral: Deal with the vulenrability.
3. DeflectionL Chnage the nature of the asset.
4. Detection: Controls to observe the attacks.
5. Recovery: Moving on from attacks.