## Feasibility and Usefulness of a Joystick-Guided Robotic Scope Holder (Soloassist) in Laparoscopic Surgery
https://karger.com/vis/article/34/1/37/328326/Feasibility-and-Usefulness-of-a-Joystick-Guided
### Solo Assist II
https://infectioncontrol.invitro.com.au/brands/aktormed/solo-assist-ii/

#### Paediatric Minimally Invasive Surgery
The **SOLO ASSIST II** with Voice Control is an Intelligent Robotic Assistant System for .
https://infectioncontrol.invitro.com.au/brands/aktormed/paediatric-minimally-invasive-surgery

_"With the goal of reducing the morbidity associated with open surgery, minimally invasive surgery in children is increasingly being performed as laparoscopic and robotic patients appear to be experiencing shorter hospital stays, decreased pain medication requirements, and the potential for improved cosmesis.” -_ Lee D.J, Kim P.H, Koh C.J. Current Trends in Pediatric Minimally Invasive Urologic Surger
### Voice control for SOLOASSIST
https://infectioncontrol.invitro.com.au/brands/aktormed/voice-control-for-soloassist
#### Key features
- Speaker independent - no speech training needed
- high responsive - average speech-to-movement time less than 200 ms
- precise – more than 95% recognition rate
- compatible with joystick control
#### Intuitive set of commands
The command set of the SOLOASSIST Voice Control SIIVoice allows a precise control over the positioning of the endoscope during operation. Any command sequence is started with the hotword SOLO. After recognition of the hotword, commands are accepted for five seconds. If no command is recognized within this time SIIVoice returns to standby mode, waiting for the hotword again.
#### Moving the endoscope
The four main directions (UP, DOWN, LEFT, RIGHT) as well as zooming (IN, OUT) can be combined with a distance modifier (ONE, TWO, THREE, FIVE, TEN) to enable an accurate control over the scope. In addition it is possible to use the keywords UPPER and LOWER to move diagonal. The command MOVE repeats the last movement.
#### Saving positions
Sometime it may be helpful to memorize a special endoscope position. With the SAVE and RESTORE keywords you can save up to three positions and restore this view when needed. With RETURN it is possible to undo the last movement.
#### Speed settings
With the SPEED keyword followed by ONE, TWO or THREE the speed of the movements of the SOLOASSIST can be adjusted to three preset speeds.
#### Are you at risk of suffering from Surgical Strain?
**RESEARCH SHOWS**: 1 IN 5 SURGEONS ARE AFFECTED and forced into early retirement, because of Surgical Strain. _The Journal of the American Medical Association - December 2017_

- Cervical Spine Disease 17%
- Rotator Cuff Pathology 18%
- Degenerative Lumbar Spine 19%
- Carpal Tunnel Syndrome 9%

https://infectioncontrol.invitro.com.au/brands/aktormed/are-you-at-risk-of-suffering-from-surgical-strain
#### Prevalence of Work-Related Musculoskeletal Disorders Among Surgeons
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/322087192_Prevalence_of_Work-Related_Musculoskeletal_Disorders_Among_Surgeons_and_Interventionalists_A_Systematic_Review_and_Meta-analysis

_"Importance Physicians in procedural specialties are at high risk for work-related musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs). This has been called “an impending epidemic” in the context of the looming workforce shortage; however, prevalence estimates vary by study. Objectives To estimate the prevalence of work-related MSDs among at-risk physicians and to evaluate the scope of preventive efforts..."_ - Sherise Epstein, MPH; Emily H. Sparer, ScD; Bao N. Tran, MD; Qing Z. Ruan, MD; Jack T. Dennerlein, PhD; Dhruv Singhal, MD; Bernard T. Lee, MD, MPH, MBA