### 1
Show natasha the work and show how (so far) the project works and to what extent
Book near deadline and show report (LaTeX). A paragraph should be understood and little questions.

Use supervisor (can give a whole chapter of report to supervisor)
The report should be self-contained, references should not make the reader understand it.
It should be understandble to any other CS student. Can that person continue the report?
Show your own understanding of the literature material e.g. lit reveiw

> a group of researches ABC considered problem X and considered method Y 
> Another group produced something else

THIS DOES NOT SHOW MUCH

If there is a core publication to support your work e.g. small examples
Replicate (prove their A=B) and then expand by showing my understanding.

Critical reading - even if you compare several methods, formulate pros and cons of methods
or even a summary table of methods. Justify the methods and go in-depth and critically compare and analyse. 

> Good in one respect and bad in another.

You educated opinion based on evidenced literature.
Mention time management.

You get a higher mark if you guide your users. Prepare a clever a summary form (guiding their feedback)
If i suspect feature A is good but feature B needs work. Use the feedback to hopefully support this.
ALWAYS BE CRITICAL.

Proof of concept prototype goes in the evaluation - it includes my own as well as the users and their metrics
Talk to Sharib and have a clear plan for implementation.

#### Self-appraisal: Have I...  
- Considered how my work could be extended?  
- Included mature personal reflection which leads to lessons learnt?  
- Suggested how the problems encountered might be avoided?  
- Considered legal, social, ethical and professional issues, with justification if one or more are not relevant?
#### e) Aiming high  
A well written and interesting report is likely to gain more marks than one that just follows the marking scheme (i.e. just ticking the boxes); in particular it will make the difference between a good project that is awarded over 70, and an excellent project that wins a prize. A well written report flows nicely, is presented logically, and is easy to understand. More time should be spent describing the challenging parts, and less time spent describing routine, or obvious, actions (though they often do need to be present). Reports that have the potential to attract a prize display a "spark" which is difficult to describe, but easy to detect; in particular it is clear to the reader that the author has fully mastered the subject.  
#### f) Other considerations  
- Are all figures and tables referenced in the main text?  
- Is the language used suitable for a technical report i.e. numbers and values, or are there imprecise words like "huge", "big", "lots" etc.?  
- As well as explaining your choice of methodology, library, tool etc., have you also justified why you did not  
- adopt other options?  
- Are all claims backed up by (i) evidence you provide, (ii) a self-contained justification, or (iii) a reference?  
- Is there any repetition, i.e. identical or similar statements in near proximity? Finding a way to merge these will  
- shorten your report, possibly to the extent of fitting within the page limit for the first time.  
- Are there any superfluous statements that may have seemed important when you first added them, but now  
- look redundant? Removing these can also save space (don't be afraid to remove text, not matter how long you  
- spent composing it in the first place - it's all part of the writing process).
## [Chapter:] Appendices - LSEP
**1. Legal, ethical, social and professional issues**
All projects must address legal, social, ethical and professional issues in an appendix; this is assessed in the final report under the 'Self-appraisal' criterion in the mark scheme. This is a requirement of the BCS (British Computing Society) who accredit our degree programmes. **Each one of legal, social, ethical and professional must be addressed.** It is unlikely any project will not have something to say about at least _one_ of these. Even if your project does not have issues for one or more, **you still need to justify why** in the final report.

For guidance on what to address, you may like to look over your notes from relevant modules (_e.g._ COMP1911 Professional Computing). Some projects from earlier years also discussed some of these issues in an appendix (especially ethics), so these may also be worth looking through, but it only became assessed for the 2018/19 session. The following links may also give you some ideas (if clicking on these links does not work, please cut-and-paste the URL into a web browser):

- The BCS Code of Conduct / Good Practice: [https://www.bcs.org/membership/become-a-member/bcs-code-of-conduct/](https://www.bcs.org/membership/become-a-member/bcs-code-of-conduct/)
- Leeds Research and Innovation Ethics page:  [https://ris.leeds.ac.uk/research-ethics-and-integrity/](https://ris.leeds.ac.uk/research-ethics-and-integrity/)
**2. Ethics**
Ethics plays a special role as some projects have ethical issues and require special procedures to be followed. We have acquired block clearance for the six most common types of ethical issues encountered in computer science projects. We also arrange lectures taken by IDEA (the Inter-Disciplinary Ethics Applied centre) to explain and discuss ethical issues for research projects in general. If you are concerned that your project will be outside these six categories, you should contact the member of IDEA who delivers these lectures.

Students should also discuss potential ethical issues with their supervisor to determine whether they need to be addressed and, if so, how they should be dealt with. You should also include actions you intend to take in your Outline and Plan report, so that your assessor can comment on them.

As a general rule of thumb, ethical issues should be considered whenever human participants are involved in the project, or when personal data might be involved. More information and guidance can be found on the University of Leeds research ethics web page (URL/link given above). Under the University's guidelines, each project must be ethically approved. This means that either it must be agreed that there are no ethical issues to address or that it is covered by block ethical approval granted by the Faculty Research Ethics Committee.

In order to ensure that ethical issues are addressed appropriately, the following procedures will be carried out as part of the project process.

1. **Outline and Plan report**: Ethical issues need to be addressed at this stage, to allow your assessor to make any comments early in the project progress. If there are ethical issues (or if you are not sure), the student should discuss these with their supervisor on how these issues may be addressed. Feedback from the project assessor may include whether these issues are being addressed appropriately. If there are no ethical issues, please state this clearly, _i.e. '_There are no ethical issues for this project' (note this will need to be expanded upon in the final report).
2. **Meeting with assessor:** If there are ethical issues for your project, these should also be discussed in the meeting with your assessor, to ensure the relevant protocols have been adhered to correctly, and if there is anything else that still needs to be done.
3. **Final Report**: Ethics must be discussed in your report alongside legal, social and professional issues, even if there are no such issues (which would still need to be justified). For ethical issues, you may need to include additional material (probably in appendices) such as: copies of emails from data owners; a description of how consent was obtained from participants; consents from web-site owners; measures taken to preserve anonymity in images; ethical assessment for NHS data. Collected consent forms should be uploaded to Minerva at the same time you submit your final report.

**3. Block Ethical Approval and Protocols**
Block ethical approval has been obtained for project activities which can be classified as one of the following five categories. Identify which category applies to your project and follow the guidance.

The main ethical issues are associated with anonymity and, for existing images, the legitimacy of the source. In the use of still and moving images of people, the student will ensure that all images are taken from legitimate sources (guided by the supervisor), that they are permitted to use the images for the project, and that copyright laws are adhered to. In addition, if CCTV footage is used or new footage is filmed for the project, the student will carry out an impact assessment to establish whether the images can be gathered in such a way that individuals cannot be identified, _e.g._ by not pointing the camera at faces, or by pixellating faces. If footage is being recorded in a public area, passers-by will be made aware of the filming by putting signs up and an alternative route which avoids the filming will be pointed out. Unless written consent has been obtained from an individual to use his/her image without anonymisation, any images collected in this way which appear in the final report will be anonymised, _e.g._ by pixellating faces.

**3.2. Medical Images**: Projects in the field of Computer Vision and Visualisation often involve the application of algorithms and software to medical images. For example:

- Automating the detection of cancerous tissue: cancer cells look different to healthy cells so computer vision techniques can be used to identify cancerous tissue. Such techniques can also be used to classify tissue samples as healthy or not.
- Development of an interface to help in the visualisation of histopathological data (images of tissue samples).

The images are used here to evaluate and improve the algorithms and software being studied by the student. The aim is to develop tools which can help to analyse images of tissue samples. The images used must be fully anonymised. The main ethical issues are associated with anonymity and the legitimacy of the source. In the use of medical images, the student will ensure that all images are taken from legitimate sources and that they are permitted to use the images for the project. All images used will be anonymised before the student has access to them. The supervisor will be able to verify the legitimacy of the source.
**3.4. User Testing**: Projects in Computing typically involve the design, development and/or evaluation of software tools and/or human-computer interfaces. In order to obtain objective feedback on the software the student may enlist a selected group of potential users to test the software. For example:

- Testing the usability of a graphical user interface.
- Evaluating whether a visualisation technique helps people to understand and interpret data more easily.

The user will typically be asked to perform specific tasks using the software (_e.g._ extracting specified information from a database). These tasks may be observed by the student to determine the ease with which they are performed. The user will also be asked to respond to questions relating to ease-of-use, functionality, potential improvements. These will most commonly be presented in the form of a questionnaire, but may involve semi-structured interviews. If testing is to take place at the workplace of an external company then the student will make sure that they have been briefed on the local health and safety protocols. Students will identify appropriate "users" under the guidance of their supervisors. 

The choice of users will depend on what the software being tested is designed to do and may require a mix of experts and non-experts (with basic IT skills). E-mail may be used to recruit potential participants. When it is appropriate for fellow students to act as testers then they may be recruited face-to-face. For web-based software, which may be evaluated remotely, potential users may be identified and recruited through appropriate on-line forums. The student will provide each participant with an information sheet which describes the purpose of the project, the data that will be collected and the use to which the collected data will be put. The participant will be assured that they can stop and withdraw from the user-testing at any time. Please see the accompanying template information sheet:

ethicsUserTesting.doc

(the details will vary from project to project). When a questionnaire is used to collect data, the participant's consent is implicit in the completion of the questionnaire. When appropriate, the student will also provide a written consent form; see accompanying template:

consentUserTesting.doc

The main ethical issues are associated with avoiding coercion of participants and ensuring anonymity. The users selected by the students will very often be fellow students. In order to avoid coercion the student will ensure that the testers/participants are aware of their rights, and that they know that participation is voluntary. No sensitive information will be recorded and any personal information collected will be stored securely.

# Final Project Checklist
## I. LESP & Ethics (Compulsory Appendix)
Every project must address all four pillars. If one is not relevant, explicitly justify why.
### 1. Ethical Issues (Block Approval & Protocols)
- **Block Approval Categories:**  
  - 3.2 Medical Images (liver anatomy analysis)  
  - 3.4 User Testing (HCI evaluation)
- **Medical Data Legitimacy:**  
  - Use fully anonymized liver `.obj` and contour files  
  - Source from verified repositories (e.g., TCIA)  
  - Supervisor must be able to verify data provenance  
- **User Testing Documentation:**  
  - Project Information Sheet (based on `ethicsUserTesting.doc`)  
  - Written consent from all participants (`consentUserTesting.doc`)  
  - Participation must be voluntary and confidential  
- **Anonymity & Data Handling:**  
  - No personal/sensitive data recorded  
  - Any contact data stored securely  
- **Health & Safety:**  
  - Brief participants on VR safety (motion sickness, lab risks)  
- **Submission Requirement:**  
  - Upload all signed consent forms with final report  
***
### 2. Legal Issues
- **BCS Code of Conduct:**  
  - Demonstrate professional competence and integrity  
- **Intellectual Property (IP):**  
  - Attribute third-party tools (Varjo SDK, Ultraleap SDK)  
  - Confirm rights to use medical datasets  
- **Data Protection:**  
  - Comply with GDPR and institutional policies  
  - Applies even to anonymized user data  
***
### 3. Social & Professional Issues
- **Social Impact:**  
  - Potential to improve surgical outcomes  
  - Reduce hospital costs  
  - Transform surgical training  
- **Professional Responsibility:**  
  - Address system reliability (gesture errors, tracking lag)  
  - Explain mitigation strategies for medical use  
***
## II. Administrative & Formatting
- **Filename:** `SURNAME26-FINAL.pdf`  
- **Submission:** Upload + email supervisor and assessor with report and repo links  
### Page Numbering
- Roman numerals (i, ii, iii): Preliminary pages  
- Arabic numerals (1, 2, 3): Main body  
### Page Limits
- Main body ≤ 30 pages (includes figures/tables)  
- Excludes preliminaries, references, appendices  
### Language Style
- Impersonal, technical tone  
- “We” acceptable; avoid “I” (except self-appraisal)  
***
### 6. Chapter 5: Self-Appraisal (10%)
- **LSEP Discussion:** Legal, Social, Ethical, Professional issues  
- **Reflection:**  
  - Development challenges (e.g., HDRP issues)  
  - Lessons learned  
- **Ethics in practice:**  
  - Consent, safety, data handling  
***
## IV. Compulsory Appendices
- **Appendix A:**  
  - Self-appraisal material (reflection + full LSEP discussion)  
- **Appendix B:**  
  - External materials (SDKs, plugins, liver models, assets)  
- **Appendix C:**  
  - Ethics documentation (info sheet, consent forms, correspondence)  
- **Appendix C+ (Optional):**  
  - Code, raw data, extended technical details  
***
## V. Writing & Content Quality
### Paragraph Model
- Point → Theory → Evidence (citations) → Evaluation  
### Key Standards
- Avoid vague terms (“fast”, “big”) → use metrics (e.g., \(<100\,ms\), \(90\,FPS\))  
- Ensure all claims are cited (Harvard or Numeric)  
- Maintain objective, technical tone  
### The “So What?” Test
- Every section must clearly contribute to improving surgical planning or XR interaction  
 