Monday 06/10/2025

---
### Learning objectives
A) For this personalised user adapted system, you have a personalised **need** for the audience
- Justify this
	- Evidence
B) Provide enough detail for everything, so that somebody --anybody could implement it if they wanted to - explain non-technically as well.
- Illustrations are ss of prototypes (appropriate illustrations)
### Overview
Write a report presenting your design. The report should be a maximum of 1500 words and no more than 6 pages, excluding references and the title page that should include the report title, student name, and student ID.

Your report should be written in an academic style, and should include the following sections:
### A. Introduction which includes:
- Justification of the selected target user group - describe the target group and justify with appropriate references why this group of people is selected for your application and why personalisation is needed).
- Outline of the requirements for your application - list the requirements and describe how you came up with them (e.g. this can be based on references you have found to justify user needs or personal experiences, or feedback from potential users, e.g. interviews/short survey). 
	- By focusing on the personalisation features, list both functional requirements (maximum 5) and non-functional requirements (maximum 5).
### B. Description of the recommender method that will be used, including:
- Justification of the selection of the recommender method using appropriate references to user-adaptive systems that use this recommender method (note that it is not necessary that the user-adaptive systems which have used the selected recommender method refer to wellbeing assistant.
- Description of the background data which will be used by the recommender method with appropriate illustrations (include description of the background data, how the data will be collected or provided, and how it will be represented).
- Description of the input data which will be used by the recommender method with appropriate illustrations (include description of the input data, how the data will be collected or provided, and how it will be represented).
- Description of the recommender algorithm including a brief outline of the main steps in the algorithm.
### C. Critical review of the proposed design, which should include:
- Strengths - describe two strengths of the proposed design and provide appropriate justification and illustration for each strength.
- Transparency - apply the checklist presented in the paper “Best Practices for Transparency in Machine Generated Personalization” by Schelenz, Segal, and Gal [paper link available in Minerva] – apply all five areas from Table 2 in the paper.
- Usability – familiarise with the usability challenges presented in the paper “Adaptive interfaces and agents” by Jameson. [pages 15-18, paper link available in Minerva] and identify two possible usability threats that are related to your proposed design, for each of these threats describe what appropriate preventive and remedial measures should be included.
### D. Video (3 minutes long) demonstrating your prototype, including:
- User scenario - the demo should be based on a user scenario that illustrates the user interaction with the systems.
- Data collection – the demo should show what data is collected from the user and how.
- User interface – the demo should show what information is presented to the user and should illustrate how the user will receive the recommendations.
- Online link to the video with a description how to access it.

Note that the demo should mock the data collection and the user interface. You are free to use any software to develop your prototype. Low fidelity, e.g. storyboarding with PowerPoint or using wireframe software will suffice for the task. If you prefer to use any high-fidelity prototyping, this will be fine too.
### E. References and acknowledgements, including:
- acknowledging and proper referencing the use of AI, please refer to the guidance provided here
- referencing all sources cited in your report following Leeds Harvard referencing style
- noting all tools used to produce the report and the video prototype