Thursday 06/11/2025

---
Is it useful to render 128 millionn triangles? No, there aren't even that many pixels.
#### 3D graphics
- Projective Pipeline
- Could do that with our primitives
- E.g., triangles with barycentric interpolation
- But slow, and few people use their own software renderers any more
- Want to utilize GPUs = Graphics Processing Units
	- (Why? Exercise 4: 8.5 GTris/sec <=> 130MTris @ 60+Hz on 3070 Ti)

Conceptual pieces:
- Graphics pipeline (will see it today already)
- Data: Triangles & Meshes
- Spaces: Model, World, Camera, Clip & Screen space
- Projection, Hidden surfaces (depth buffering)
- Texturing, Lighting & Materials
##### OpenGL New Exercises
- Exercise G.2 - G.6 available:
- G.2: Triangle
- G.3: 3D
- G.4: Meshes & Data
- G.5: Shading & Lighting
- G.6: Texturing.
#### GPU
- Ubiquitous these days
	- Wasn’t always the case
	- OpenGL: doesn’t really address it specifically
	- Vulkan: built around the idea of a “device” (=GPU)
- Integrated (iGPU) vs discrete (dGPU)
	- Separate device that executes asynchronously!
	- Massively parallel
- Separate device:
	- Communication costs, latency
	- PCIe 4.0 x1: ~2GB/s, x16: ~32GB/s; RAM: ~40GB/s (DDR4-2666, dual channel)
	- RTX 3070 Ti: ~600 GB/s (GDDR6X)
- Asynchronous:
	- Avoid waiting between CPU and GPU
- Massively parallel:
	- “Do many things”
- Programming model:
	- Queue jobs for it to process “later”
	- Each job should include many tasks
	- Each task does the same thing, but with different data
- Avoid waiting for results
#### So what is OpenGL?
- Graphics API
- Lets us draw stuff
	- Rasterization
	- Incidentally: one way to talk to a GPU
	- Compute stuff (compute shaders)
- Also: talk to GPU
	- But GPUs didn’t exist in their current form when OpenGL was released
	- GeForce 256 in 1999 vs. OpenGL in 1992. (3dfx Voodoo was 1994)
	- Modern GPUs look very different.
	- Original philosophy: precede hardware evolution