Thursday 05/11/2025

---
### Outline
We'll be looking at ethical issues that might arise in your projects and how to manage these.
1. Two common issues in computing projects
	a) Consent
	b) Privacy and anonymity
2. Six areas of block ethical approval
	a) Images of people
	b) Medical images
	c) Use of religious texts
	d) User testing
	e) Use of data from the internet
	f) Working with NHS staff
3. Applying this to a case study
#### 1 . Common Issues in Computing Projects
##### Consent
Each person has a right to control their body, property, and who has access to these.
- Includes access to data, which is property of the subject and is about them.
- Consent is a kind of permission-giving; it often, but not perhaps always, makes an act ethically permissible.
- Securing a person’s consent before collecting or accessing their data is important for respecting their autonomy and boundaries.
- Sometimes people can’t consent due to mental impairment, e.g. very old and very young.
- A person does not properly consent to something if they are pressured into agreeing or do not understand what they are agreeing to.
- So, consent must be:
	- Free
	- Informed
- If your project involves collecting data about users, this presents a risk.
- In that case, you must have the informed consent of users.
- Fully informed about what their data is used for, and what data is collected.
##### Privacy and Anonymity
Consent is also important because it relates to privacy.
- Privacy is important:
- For individuality of thought and expression
- For freedom from control
- For regulating boundaries in relationships
- For control over who experiences us
- Lack of privacy hinders human flourishing in fiction (George Orwell’s 1984) and totalitarian regimes (eg. North Korea).

If data identifies a person, then it is personal data.
- Collecting personal data creates a risk of harm:
- Discrimination (belonging to oppressed groups; religion, sexuality, ethnicity)
- Social disadvantages (mental health history, criminal record)
- Identity fraud, targeted marketing, harassment
- Violating someone’s choice/autonomy: should be up to individuals what data is collected about them
##### Personal Data: Direct and Indirect Indicators
**Direct Indicators**
Can be used to directly identify the data subject.
- Unique to a person.
- Includes:
- Name/initials
- Address, including full or partial post code
- Telephone numbers or email addresses
- Unique identifying numbers (NI number, NHS number)
- Vehicle identifiers
- Medical device identifiers
- IP addresses
- Facial photographs
- Names of relatives
- Individual dates

**Indirect Indicators**
Can be used in conjunction with other information (direct or indirect) to identify data subjects.
- Includes:
- Place of treatment or GP name
- Sex
- Place of birth
- Socio-economic data (income, etc.)
- Ethnicity
- Age
- Household or family constitution
- Illicit drug use, or other substance use
- Rare diseases and treatments
- Transcripts or verbatim responses
##### Data Linkage
- “Data linkage” can occur when two (or more) pieces of information from different sources are brought together.
-  This can identify a data subject, or reveal information that is not available in one dataset.
-  This means that even if data is anonymized within the context of its own data set, linkage may de-anonymize the data.
### 2. Six Areas of Block Ethical Approval
- There are some kinds of data that you are approved to collect as part of this module.
- However, each of these must be collected, stored, and processed in line with certain guidelines and restrictions.x
##### a) Images of people
- Your project might involve using still or moving images of
people
- For instance:
- Tracking individuals in crowded scenes
- Facial feature recognition
- Projects might use new or pre-existing images

- New images:
	- Proper consent forms collected
	- Participants given all appropriate information necessary for informed consent.
- Existing images only be taken from legitimate sources
- When public filming, impact assessments performed to
determine whether individuals can be identified.
##### b) Medical images
- Your project might involve the application of algorithms to medical images.
- For instance:
	- Automating the detection of cancerous tissue
	- Developing interfaces to help with the visualization of tissue samples
- The project might use images from people’s medical records.

**Ethical issues involved in using medical images?**
- Anonymization – Medical data is private; can be sensitive, embarrassing
- Storage / misuse / theft – medical data desirable
- Legitimacy of sources
**What should be done to avoid potential problems?**
- Ensure that the images are taken from legitimate source
- Ensure images anonymized (you should receive them anonymized, but there could be mistakes)
- Ensure storage is secure
##### c) Use of religious texts
Projects in the field of Natural Language Processing can involve the automated analysis of text
- These can be religious texts
- For instance:
	- Categorization of verses in the Quran
	- Machine Translation of the Quran into other languages

**Ethical issues involved in using religious texts?**
- Objects of sacred importance to some; respectful use
- Misinterpretation or translation by the program
- Types of interpretation to use? Literal (word for word) or dynamic (sense for sense)?
- Copyright law violation
##### d) User testing
- Project might involve getting user feedback on a system being designed, developed, or evaluated.
- For example:
	- Testing the usability of a graphical user interface
	- Evaluating whether a visualization technique helps people to understand and interpret data more easily
- Obtaining this feedback might involve: observation, questionnaires, or interviews

- You must provide each participant with an information sheet fully detailing the project, the data that will be collected, how the data will be stored and used.
- You must assure users that they can leave at any time, to avoid coercion.
- When appropriate, the user will complete a written consent form.
- No sensitive information will be recorded, and any personal information will be securely stored.
##### e) Use of data from the internet
- Your project might involve analysis of data collected from the internet
- For instance:
	- Publicly available databases, eg. government data could be analyzed to identify trends and patterns
	- Data about website use may be analyzed to extract trends

**Ethical issues in data drawn from the internet?**
- Legitimacy of sources?
- Anonymized?
- Reliable data?
- Consent from appropriate sources, eg. website owners?

**What should be done to avoid potential problems?**
- Only draw data from reliable and legitimate sources
- Any data relating to individuals to be anonymized
- Consent given when appropriate
##### f) Working with NHS staff
- Your project might:
	- Aim to understand how specific elements of technology are used
	- Assess the benefits or drawbacks of some new element of technology
- This might involve observing staff, getting them to read documents or fill out questionnaires, or performing interviews
- Provide information sheet about your project, obtain written consent when appropriate, assure staff they can withdraw from participating
- Discuss with staff beforehand how to avoid sensitive information/being left alone with patients
- Not requesting/accessing information about individual patients
- No sensitive information recorded, any personal information securely stored
- No participant named without express consent
- Students briefed on health and safety protocols
### 3. Applying this to a case study
#### Example 1: Target
- In 2002, US shop chain Target employed a data scientist called Andrew Pole to “figure out if a customer is pregnant, even if she didn’t want us to know”.
- They intended to use the results of this work to send personalised coupons for relevant products to customers they expected to be pregnant.
- Pole started by looking at the dataset of customers who told Target they were pregnant. He analysed the shopping habits of these customers to discover patterns. On the basis of this data, developed a “pregnancy prediction” score.
- Using this software, Pole could estimate due dates and send coupons timed for specific times in the pregnancy.
- One year later an angry customer demanded: “Are you encouraging my teenage daughter to get pregnant?” Target had been sending her coupons for pregnancy products.
- One week later, the manager contacted the man again. This time, the man disclosed that his daughter was actually pregnant, but had not told him until the coupons prompted her to do so.
- Target knew that the teenage girl was pregnant, on the basis of Pole's predictive software, before her father knew.
##### Observations
- What are the ethical issues here?
- Did Andrew Pole do anything wrong?
- Imagine you were doing his job. Would you have done anything differently?
### - Summarised the nature of ethics and why it is important
- Considered some important ethical concepts: consent, anonymity, privacy
- Examined six specific areas of ethical concern, which your projects might involve
- Applied these notions to a specific case study