Monday 06/10/2025

---
#### Module Objectives
Three types of distributed systems
1. High performance distributed computing systems
2. Distributed information systems
3. Distributed systems for pervasive computing
#### High Performance Distributed Computing System
High-performance distributed computing started with parallel computing
• Multiprocessor and multi-core versus multi-computer 
#### Distributed Shared Memory systems 
Observation Multiprocessors are relatively easy to program in comparison to multi-computers, yet have problems when increasing the number of processors (or cores). 

Solution: Try to implement a shared-memory model on top of a multi-computer. Example through virtual-memory techniques Map all main-memory pages (from different processors) into one single virtual address space. 

If a process at processor A addresses a page P located at processor B, the OS at A traps and fetches P from B, just as it would if P had been located on local disk. 

Problem
Performance of distributed shared memory could never compete with that of multiprocessors, and failed to meet the expectations of programmers. It has been widely abandoned by now.
 
Cluster Computing
- Essentially a group of high-end systems connected
- through a Local Area Network (LAN)
- Homogeneous: same OS, near-identical hardware
- Single managing node
 
Grid Computing
The next step: lots of nodes from everywhere
• Flexible, secure, coordinated resource sharing among dynamic collections of individuals, institutions, and resources
• Enable communities “Virtual Organisations” to share geographically distributed resources as they pursue common goals

Cloud Computing
Cloud computing is an information technology infrastructure in which computing resources are virtualised and accessed as a service.
 
  Distinction between four layers:
1. Hardware: Processors, routers, power and cooling systems.
	Customers normally never get to see these
2. Infrastructure: Deploys virtualisation techniques. 
	Evolves around allocating and managing virtual storage devices and virtual servers
3. Platform: Provides higher-level abstractions for storage and such.
4. Application: Actual applications, such as office suites (text processors, spreadsheet applications, presentation applications). Comparable to the suite of apps shipped with OSes.
	Comparable to the suite of apps shipped with OSes.
  
### Distributed Information Systems
Context: Integrating applications
Situation: organisations confronted with many networked applications, but achieving interoperability was painful.
Basic approach: a networked application is one that runs on a server making its services available to remote clients. Simple integration: clients combine requests for (different) applications; send that off; collect responses, and present a coherent result to the user. 

Next step: allow direct application-to-application communication, leading to Enterprise Application Integration (EAI).
  
Example: Distributed Transaction Processing
Context: Database applications where operations are carried out in the form of transactions

Transaction:
Primitive Description
BEGIN_TRANSACTION Mark the start of a transaction
END_TRANSACTION Terminate the transaction and try to commit
ABORT_TRANSACTION Kill the transaction and restore the old values
READ Read data from a file, a table, or otherwise
WRITE Write data from a file, a table, or otherwise

All or Nothing Property
Atomic: happens indivisibly (seemingly)
Consistent: does not violate system in-variants
Isolated: not mutual interference between concurrent transactions
Durable: commit means changes are permanent
 
**TPM: Transaction Processing Monitor**
In many cases, the data involved in a transaction is distributed across several servers. A TP Monitor is responsible for coordinating the execution of a transaction. 
  
**Middleware and EAI**
Middleware offers communication facilities for application integration Remote Procedure Call (RPC): Requests are sent through local procedure call, packaged as message, processed, responded through message, and result returned as return from call.

Message Oriented Middleware (MOM): Messages are sent to logical contact
point (published), and forwarded to subscribed applications
 
**Distributed Pervasive Systems**
Emerging next-generation of distributed systems in which nodes are small, mobile, and often embedded in a larger system, characterised by the fact that the system naturally blends into the user's environment

◼ Often coined as the Internet of Things (IoT)
◼ Three (overlapping) sub-types:
1. Ubiquitous computing systems: pervasive and continuously present, i.e., there is a continuous interaction between system and user.
2. Mobile computing systems: pervasive, but emphasis is on the fact that devices are inherently mobile.
3. Sensor (and actuator) networks: pervasive, with emphasis on the actual (collaborative) sensing and actuation of the environment.

**Mobile Computing Systems**
Features:
A myriad of different mobile devices (smartphones, tablets, GPS devices, remote controls)
◼ Mobile implies that a device's location is expected to change over time, change of local services, reachability

Keyword: discovery
Communication may become more difficult: no stable route, (possibly) no guaranteed connectivity
◼ disruption-tolerant networking.

Bottom line: Mobile devices set up connections to stationary servers, essentially bringing mobile computing in the position of clients of cloud-based services.
a) Mobile cloud computing
b) Mobile edge computing

