Machine Learning Overview
What will you learn?
- What is Data Mining?
- What is Artificial Intelligence?
- What is Machine Learning
- Data Mining vs Machine Learning
- Supervised Learning
- Unsupervised Learning
- Reinforcement Learning

What is Data Mining?
• Data mining, also known as knowledge discovery in data (KDD), is the process of
uncovering patterns and other valuable information from large data sets.

What is Artificial intelligence?
• The term Artificial Intelligence, as a research field, was coined at the conference on
the campus of Dartmouth College in the summer of 1956, even though the idea was
around since antiquity.
• For instance, in the first manifesto of Artificial Intelligence, “Intelligent Machinery”, in
1948 Alan Turing distinguished two different approaches to AI, which may be termed
"top-down“ or knowledge-driven AI and "bottom-up“ or data-driven AI

What is Artificial intelligence?
• The two different approaches to AI can be detailed:
– "top-down“ or knowledge-driven AI
• cognition = high-level phenomenon, independent of low-level details of implementation
mechanism, first neuron (1943), first neural network machine (1950), neucognitron (1975)
• Evolutionary Algorithms (1954,1957, 1960), Reasoning (1959,1970), Expert Systems (1970),
Logic, Intelligent Agent Systems (1990)…
– "bottom-up“ or data-driven AI
• opposite approach, start from data to build incrementally and mathematically mechanisms
taking decisions
• Machine learning algorithms, Decision Trees (1983), Backpropagation (1984-1986), Random
Forest (1995), Support Vector Machine (1995), Boosting (1995), Deep Learning (1998/2006)…

• AI is originally defined, by Marvin Lee Minsky, as “the construction of computer
programs doing tasks, that are, for the moment, accomplished more satisfyingly by
human beings because they require high level mental processes such as: learning.
perceptual organization of memory and critical reasoning”.
• There are so the "artificial" side with the usage of computers or sophisticated
electronic processes and the side “intelligence” associated with its goal to imitate
the (human) behavior

Why Learn?
• Machine learning is programming computers to optimize a performance criterion
using example data or past experience.
• There is no need to “learn” to calculate payroll
• Learning is used when:
• Human expertise does not exist (navigating on Mars),
• Humans are unable to explain their expertise (speech recognition)
• Solution changes in time (routing on a computer network)
• Solution needs to be adapted to particular cases (user biometrics)

What do we mean by Learning?
• Learning general models from a data of particular examples
• Data is cheap and abundant (data warehouses, data marts); knowledge is
expensive and scarce.
• Example in retail: Customer transactions to consumer behavior:
• People who bought “Da Vinci Code” also bought “The Five People You Meet in
Heaven” (www.amazon.com)
• Build a model that is a good and useful approximation to the data.
• Retail: Market basket analysis, Customer relationship management (CRM)
• Finance: Credit scoring, fraud detection
• Manufacturing: Optimization, troubleshooting
• Medicine: Medical diagnosis
• Telecommunications: Quality of service optimization
• Bioinformatics: Motifs, alignment
• Web mining: Search engines

What is Machine Learning?
• Optimize a performance criterion using example data or past experience.
• Role of Statistics: Inference from a sample
• Role of Computer science: Efficient algorithms to
• Solve the optimization problem
• Representing and evaluating the model for inference

Problems
• Regression
• (Supervised) Classification
• Density Estimation / Clustering
(Unsupervised Classification)
• Feature Selection
• Association analysis
• Anomality/Novelty/Drift

Possible Solutions
- Machine Learning
	- Support Vector Machine
	- Artificial Neural Network
	- Boosting
	- Decision Tree
	- Random Forest
- Statistical Learning
	- Gaussian Models (GMM)
	- Naïve Bayes
	- Gaussian processes
- Other techniques

Data Mining vs Machine Learning
• Data mining looks for patterns that already exist in the data, while machine
learning learns from past data to predict future outcomes.

DM focuses on the discovery of hidden patterns, trends, anomalies or knowledge from data with the goal of extracting insights and information from existing datasets.
ML focuses on the development of algorithms that learn from data, building models to predict, classify, cluster or perform tasks.
















